---
title: Fields
---

Every column is represented as a single field.
Field name is column name converted to camel case, so if column name is `post_id`, field name
will be `postId`.
Every field is tied to single collection (as column is to the table). If collection is disabled, all
it's fields are unaccessible. Data about fields in stored in `zmaj_field_metadata`.

Zmaj tries to leverage database as much as possible. There is no config in Zmaj for default value, unique or required,
since database provides those features.
Zmaj will simply provide inputs for database config when creating field.

:::caution
Field configuration will not do anything if you are making changes manually to the database, e.g. by running raw SQL query
directly.
:::

### Disable reading field value

Every fields has `canRead`. If value is `false`, this field's value will never be returned from the database.
This is useful for passwords, when you don't want them returned, but you will read them manually form database.

### Disable setting field value when updating record

It is possible to disable field value from updating. Set `canUpdate` to `false`. This will ensure
that value cannot be updated. Value can still be set when creating record [see](#disable-creating-field-value).
For example, `createdBy` field should never be changed.

### Disable setting field value when creating record

If you do not want field value to be set when creating record, you can set `canCreate` value to `false`. This is useful
if value is auto generated by database, or should only be set at the later date,
for example, in `todos` collection, `finishedAt` field should never be set when creating record.

### Disable sorting

If you want to forbid sorting by current field, you can set `sortable` column to `false`. This will prevent sorting
by that column when accessing API. By default you can sort by any field.

### Timestamps

Field can act as a `createdAt` and `updatedAt` timestamp by setting `isCreatedAt` or `isUpdatedAt`.
Only one field in collection can be set to be timestamp (1 for created, 1 for updated).
This is done on ORM level, so whenever record is changed within an app, timestamp will be updated.

There is unique constraint in Postgres database that prevents you from having multiple timestamps in same collection.

:::caution
If you are changing record outside of app, like with raw SQL query, `isCreatedAt` and `isUpdatedAt` have
no effect.
If both `isCreatedAt` and `isUpdatedAt` are `true`, `isUpdatedAt` has priority.
:::

### Label

You can set field's label by setting `label` property. This label is used in admin panel instead of field name.

### Description

You can add `description` to field. That value will be used as a helper text bellow input field to explain to
users what this field does.

### Admin Panel Component

You can customize what component should be rendered in the admin panel for current field by specifying `componentName`.
This way you can provide better UX to users of your panel.
For example, set to `email` to display email input, `password` to set password input where value is hidden.
Possible components will be shown in dropdown when creating/updating field.

By default admin panel will render generic component based on your column type (e.g. int input for integer column).

### Additional Field Config

Fields can have additional configuration that is stored in `fieldConfig` field as a single JSON in database.
Some properties are constant, and some are dependent on type of column (and selected component).
Validation provided here is only used in client, so make sure to validate data on the server as well.
Best way to edit field config is trough admin panel, since configuration is different depending on component,
and component can provide it's own inputs (e.g. number input can provide min and max input).
